Title: On poetry, finance and internet bots

----

Date: 2015-09-15

----

Tags: poetry,finance,language,internet bots,Franco Bifo Berardi,Angela Merkel

----

Video: 

----

Soundcloud: 

----

Text: 

Last night I read a couple of interviews over at Triple Canopy, both of which were about making poetry in the 21st century: in one, [The Technocrat’s Guide to the Galaxy](http://canopycanopycanopy.com/contents/the-technocrats-guide-to-the-galaxy), it was discussed the definition of the poet as someone producing and dealing with affective labour; in the other, [Psychoanalytic Night at Hooters](http://canopycanopycanopy.com/issues/20/contents/psychoanalytic-night-at-hooters), there was a nice exhchange about the production of poetry as an imitative process and how much the use of a bot could help and or influence it.

As soon as I finished the first article and later on I moved to the other one, I slowly start to see how I could find a bit more of a concrete example, or application, of what Franco "Bifo" Berardi is talking about in its book [The Uprising](http://semiotexte.com/?page_id=1152), which is subtitled "On Poetry and Finance".

In it Bifo makes a comparison and an analysis between the language of finance and the one of poetry: what's in common? The use of a certain kind of language which stops to refer to the actual object, or to an object, and instead just connects different ideas, emotions, etc: within Financial Capitalism, money buys information, not goods anymore; in the realm of Poetry, from the Symbolists onward, words no longer look for an object to refer to, but are on their own, they become symbols.

The difference, though, lies in the fact that Poetry is the ‹the language on nonexchangeability, the return of infinite hermeneutics and the retourn to the sensous body of language›, it is ‹an excess (...) a hidden resource which enables us to shift from one paradigm to another› [^1].

It's quite fundamental for Bifo to be able to reconnect language to the sensous body, mainly because The last generations have learnt more words from a machine than from the body of the mother, to quote him again.

Going back to the two interviews, I found quite interesting how direct Srikanth Reddy was in saying, about affective labour, that:

> I think there’s a certain negative capability, or a cultivated uncertainty, that one must maintain with regard to one’s affective labors as a poet—otherwise the work becomes a kind of emotional connect-the-dots. 

And he continues:

> But to speculate further, I would say that I want to move away from an ideological orientation regarding what a poem or a poetic practice can do. The writers I admire most are involved in a kind of sensitive and sensual labor, rather than a self-consciously political practice. I worry sometimes that affect drops out of the conversation when we focus on the political aspects of the art. Or maybe the affect becomes flattened out into mere outrage, or melancholia. To maintain the full spectrum of feeling in one’s work, I think one has to think of the work of poetry as a kind of affective enterprise first and foremost—and doing that involves preserving one’s subjectivity as a resource for that work, against antisubjectivist or other political claims that would overdetermine one’s emotional cogito.

He's very clear in defining the work that he does not as cultural, but as affective. It is affective labour in his view.

I wonder how a coder can connect his language to the sphere of the sensuous body. I'd like to find out, because I'm not so sure that leaving employees free of playing table football at work is the way to go in making a better workplace.

I'm not comparing his practice and job to the one of a software developer. Though one might find some common ground in the two—and there are some commonalities—the kind of intensive-exploitation going on is quite different, or at least happens with different modalities: to be clear, I see a software developer being more stressed out on a daily basis for the long coding session she he is doing, and moreover for a general culture of constant updates and night-marathons.

Little digression to accomodate a new element: last week I was reading and thinking about Angela Merkel and her way of doing politics and of keeping under her foot the UE. In particular, while reading Berardi aforementioned book, and going through many passages in which he describes the technocratic way of doing things, included its use of language, I happened to formulate this thought: why not trying to think of Angela Merkel as an internet bot?

If the technocratic government put in place is the product of neo-liberalism and financialisation of life in all its aspects, in a word *governance*, isn't Angela Merkel a mere machine driving the whole train (or whatever metaphor you'd like to use) according to pre-scripted rules? And if she's not such thing, or if she's not following pre-scripted rules, then I find her way of delivering messages, of speaking, in no way less interesting.

It is from this other thought, then, that I moved to read the interview with K. Silem Mohammad, in which he talks about becoming a bot but at the same time being able to program it.

If production of language becomes automatic, or automatised, the best position to fully take advantage of the machine is to be on both sides, at different times.

Talking about one of his ways to make poetry, in which he takes one Sonnets from Shakespeare and sets up
  
> an imitative situation, performing operations that contain the mechanical features of imitation (same meter, rhyme scheme, couplet closure, etc.)

but strives

> to produce a final object that is remarkable precisely for its aesthetic dissimilarity to the original in certain key ways (seriousness or lack thereof, thwarted rhetorical patterns that devolve into nonsense, and other breaches of decorum)

K. Silem Mohammad ends up talking about this imitation technique as a way to ultimately imitate himself, or actually the byproduct of this practice, a bot:

> I do find myself slipping into a formulaic approach from time to time. And that formula seems to follow an accretive, reflexive pattern. But another way of thinking about it that just occurs to me is that I also seem to be imitating a bot or some kind of algorithmically driven software program. The arbitrariness of subject matter, predictable rhythms, etc.

The crucial part is when, as I mentioned above, you are able to play on both sides of the machine, being the machine and the external figure who programs yourself.

> I want to be visible as the little guy “programming” the bot. The sonnet form is perfect for that classical authorship effect in which the “I” keeps pointing at itself, insisting on its genius. I like the way the impersonal bot behavior counteracts the narcissistic author behavior, and vice versa.

This is where I can reconnect to Angela Merkel and delineating the hypothesis of her as an internet bot producing language within pre-scripted contexts.

If a) in the post-fordist economy what is produced is language, an abundant amount of informations, and if b), as Bifo says in The Uprising, we are ("we" is, first of all, referred to the so called cognitive workers) in need of a new language—in order to disentangle ourselves from the current financial-imbued language—, c) what if one way to accomplish this would be to start to see automatised and or automatic [^2] internet-bot language as a strategy to accomplish it?

Of course bots are already pervading internets services and apps, sometimes with machine bots, sometimes with meatbody bot.

I am curious to see if mixing poetry and (internet) bots would help us to steer away from the current state of language production, hence of reality.


[^1]: pp. 139–140, [The Uprising](http://semiotexte.com/?page_id=1152), Franco Bifo Berardi, 2012, Semiotext(e).
[^2]: I have to discuss about this difference, if there's any.

----

Aside: Brief comment: [Triple Canopy](http://www.canopycanopycanopy.com/), together with [The New Inquiry](http://thenewinquiry.com/)—but in totally different ways (see, the kind of content)—is one of the best *fluid* magazines happening now. [Gender fluid](http://nonbinary.org/wiki/Genderfluid), fluid magazine: a magazine that takes different forms and formats to accomplish whatever it has in mind.