## Chapter #3, Conclusion

In order to proceed with the above question, there is one more element to bring into account: the new geographies we live in as users. Benjamin Bratton proposes The Stack, both as a schema and a structure, to understand the overall population of different computational systems already in use and constituting the world we inhabit. The Stack refers to:
> a transformation in the technical infrastructure of global systems, whereby planetary-scale computation has so thoroughly and fundamentally transformed the logics of political geography in its own image that it has produced new geographies and new territories that can enforce themselves. Unlike modern political geography, which divided up horizontal maps, Stack geography also vertically layers spaces on top of one another. Instead of surveying all the various forms of planetary-scaled computation—cloud computing, smart cities, ubiquitous computing, massive addressing systems, next-generation interfaces, nonhuman users, and so on—as different genres or species of computing, each off on its own, this model locates them on layers of a consolidated metaplatform, an accidental megastructure. (...) The Stack is a model for thinking about the technical arrangement of planetary computation as a coherent totality, as well as a conceptual model for thinking the contradictory and complex spaces that have been produced in its image.
Benjamin H. Bratton, The Stack—On Software and Sovereignty, 2016, pp. 375.

A new set of ethics dealing first with the user position, then trying to move beyond it and embrace the posthuman environment of the user, will have to work in close relation with the geographies of something like The Stack. Computation has significantly become an ubiquitous process part of our reality and of the nature of the time we live in. To better operate in this new space and being able to explore the user position we can inhabit as humans, a *new literacy of computation* will be necessary.

In tracing lines between the post-fordist worker and the internet user, and the related working environments the two subjects operate within (respectively office-home-etc., using internet to communicate with a team or clients; and internet platform) I saw, very often, a lack in the understanding, knowledge and experience of this new position. With the intentions to foster processes that amplify the formation of such new sensibilities, a new literacy of computation would refer to, for example, the making of a new language through which describing what happens when we interact with other users (for instance, framing users as ‘operative’ and not as ‘living organisms’, as pointed out in Chapter #1); and, getting to know and mastering (while being mastered by as well) the tools we have at our disposal, both accidentally built or intentionally designed. This last one can be seen amongst the founding values that describe usership: a set of practices where using, reusing, misusing, repurposing, and so forth, have become a common framework of action specifically because of the rising of digital technologies. Usership, in this respect, might be seen as a continuation, into less specific environments, of the hacker ethos of learning something by dissecting it. 

It is because of these reasons that `git` might also be an experiment in the act of defining what might a new and different literacy of computation look like. As a tool to track informations and build histories out of it, it can as well be used in a reversal manner and let human users better understand what are the other applications and ethical repercussions of this activity. As a response to the general public discussion about the collection of citizens’ metadata from companies and governmental institutions alike, `git` might be used to reflect about the different architectures of data collection and distribution, re-staging on a personal scale systems that might be hard to grasp at first, when contextualise on larger environments.

At the same time, through a new literacy of computation, I look for ways to embrace complexities that are not user-friendly in the current meaning of the term, often handicapping my human-user framing, understanding and mis-understanding of them, and longing for tasting data, for being able to relate to it in modalities that go beyond looking at my stats on a website platform’s dashboard, but for example realising that my own body is a mix of metadata of different kinds, starting from my own faeces:
> Grandparent toilet bowl stool diviners, you were right: considering the density of DNA from microbes, from one’s own internal fluids, and from the DNA of the remaining food stuffs that one ate, the human stool is one of the most information-dense substances you are likely to regularly encounter. Bit by bit, your stool is far more information rich per cubic centimeter than the flash memory in your iPhone.
Benjamin H. Bratton, The Stack—On Software and Sovereignty, 2016, pp. 269.

Relating the understanding of my reality, body included, with data doesn’t necessarily turn me into a computer. Inversely, it can help me to better relate with data and computation without making me forget the starting position from which I am experiencing it: a human body.

I think, overall, that a new literacy of computation, understood in this way, might also help to finally realise that we don’t have to take either the positions of machines (as in, human beings are machines processing data and provided with functioning organs), or the one of nostalgic human beings trying to restore a supposedly once existed balance that governed the world, between the natural world and us. 

We live surrounded by machines of different kinds, with data and its computation that has become essential in the functioning of our reality, but not for this we have to overcome our nature of human beings and strive for delirious transhumanist positions—where the mastery of the world is in the hands of human beings with implanted prosthetics components to augment their sense of power and control around them. Posthuman, for how I intend it, doesn’t mean beyond human, or over the human. Posthuman means human beings at the side of the world, as one side of the world, because there are many other entities inhabiting it. Rather than disparaging what makes us human beings, it’s maybe a matter of iterating ourselves over what keeps us from finding ways to relate with other users. Machinic, plant, mineral, animal, algorithmic. They might ignore us, but we might realise we are in need of them.
