1.
In your book The Last Night, you propose the figure of the adventurer and squanderer as a parasite “who uses work as a tool to provide him-herself with all he she needs—or with all he she can take.” There is a growing debate about how to realise a society where work is no longer central for human beings, and in which as a way to provide a “good life” (housing, food, education, etc.) a universal basic income is implemented at a global level and regardless of citizenship status. In these circumstances, why might the figure of the adventurer still exist?

2.
Does a shift toward a post-work society includes also a shift in the conatus as work—that is, that “innate” drive to sustain one’s life, in this case through a job? How would this influence the relationship between a worker and the activity of worship, as described in your book, that he she performs toward his her job? Would this mantra break? Or would it get stronger and more pure, because less dependant on providing material needs?

3.
Would you associate the adventurer’s disregard for social recognition, because a form of social fiction (“society is an abstract entity” as you define it), and his her need for darkness “in order to grow fully”, as a way to disregard social accountability as well? What’s the role accountability plays for an adventurer, also in relation to other adventurers?

4.
Can there be a form of collaboration between adventurers? How would this take shape with an adventurer’s general non-belief in what you refer to as “the higher purpose” of one’s work? And what might this look like?

5.
You talk about the competition human beings perform against machines, in an attempt to keep up with their pace and level of production, instead of seeing them as helpful companions. Posthuman ethics, in this case, are quite useful to better understand human agency in the world in relation to many other different agents, being it animal, plant, mineral, machinic, algorithmic, etc. Do you think an adventurer might adopt or make use of posthuman ethics, in this regard, to rebalance and reposition him herself in relation to machines?

6.
Would you say that it’s possible to define a difference between labour and work? The former as any activity performed within a job and the latter, instead, as a general activity demanding a certain amount of energy, attention, and interest no matter the context? Or is it maybe the opposite?

7.
You describe the non-religious submission to work as choosing the alternative “of the desert, of freedom, of a fullness of life”. How do you think people would react, then, when facing the reality of a possible post-work, universal basic income-based society?