Last night I went to a horrible, low-quality event organised by and held at Hotel Droog, and fortunately the last speaker (one out of three) was a very interesting guy.

A philosopher from Italy moved to Delft University to teach a course on ethics to classes of young engineers working with robots.

Willing to email him and have a coffee together, here some thoughts:

Filippo (the name of the philosopher), was talking about how humans imbued values and meanings to objects (included in this also robots?). I wonder if that would change within a posthuman society or a posthuman framework for the people, for example, building robots. Is there a way to set up a new robot with as few human attributes as possible and let him “grow” by itself?

How would agency be understood in a posthuman society, in relation to inhuman and ahuman agents (or users)?

Of course these things often times, unlike animals and plants theoretically, do exist because of a human agency which decided to build them. But then is there a way to give them enough space to figure out how to find their “place in the world” by themselves (through a relation with other users, for example)?

What’s the role of engineers then, in building robots and giving them a certain set of values? Does that count to give them ethics?

* * *

## Ideas for thesis

Setting up an interview with [Federico Campagna](http://www.federicocampagna.eu/), author of “The Last Night—Anti-work, Atheism, Adventure”, on the spinozian concept of *conatus*, a striving toward something—in this case towards work—in the context of a post-work society where a universal basic income is at its foundation.

Why should we desire to work when we don’t have to, in order to live? Is our work a way to keep tight social bonding? Could work become at its core a way to collaborate on projects together? And what about robots?

Think if making the interview through emails or through Google Hangout (and use the video documentation in some way).

Still, use either the written exchange or a transcription of it for a section of the thesis.