# ow—thesis chapter #3, conclusion (draft)

> The best example is the Copyriot blog by Rasmus Fleischer of Pyratbiran (Bureau of Piracy), an anti-IP think tank and the one-time founders of Pirate Bay, the most used Bittorent tracker in the P2P community. The motto of copyriot is no copyright, no license. But there is a difference from the older anti copyright tradition.
> Fleischer claims that copyright has become absurd in the age of digital technology because it has to resort to all sorts of fictions, like distinctions between uploading and downloading or between producer and consumer, which don’t actually exist in horizontal P2P communication.
> Pyratbiran rejects copyright in its entirety – not because it was flawed in its inception, but because it was invented to regulate an expensive, one-way machine like the printing press, and it no longer corresponds to the practices that have been made possible by current technologies of reproduction.
Copyright, Copyleft And The Creative Anti-Commons, Anna Nimus (2006).

[Autonomous Commons](http://p2pfoundation.net/Autonomous_Commons)
> Both Nimus and Cramer's critiques remain closer to the libertarian tradition with few accounts of the surplus-value extraction and big economy behind IP (in any form: copyright, copyleft or CC). On the opposite among post-Autonomist Marxists a stronger criticism is moved against the ideology implicitly pushed by CC and other forms of a digital-only commonism. For instance activist Martin Hardie thinks that "The logic of FLOSS seems only to promise a new space for entrepreneurial freedom where we are never exploited or subject to others' command. The sole focus upon 'copyright freedom' sweeps away consideration of the processes of valorisation active within the global factory without walls."23 Hardie criticise FLOSS precisely because it never questions the way it is captured by capital and its relations with the productive forces.

> In a schematic way, autonomous commons:
> 1. allow not only passive and personal consumption but even a productive use of the common stock - implying commercial use by single workers;

> 2. question the role and complicity of the commons within the global economy and put the common stock out of the exploitation of large companies;

> 3. are aware of the asymmetry between immaterial and material commons and the impact of immaterial accumulation over material production (e.g. IBM using Linux);

> 4. consider the commons as an hybrid and dynamic space that dynamically must be built and defended." (http://www.rekombinant.org/docs/Ideology-of-Free-Culture.pdf)

* what is tracking and what are its effects for the economies as well as the ethics of the (posthuman) internet user

* * *

What I’d like to pose as a new question, now, directly relates with two things: 1. a culture of information technology that for the most part incited everything but a level of curiosity and exploration, typical for example of the Free and Open Source Software communities (now spreading popularity through the ‘hacking mentality’ franchise); 2. a decentering of the human being as the privileged entity part of the world we live in.

Due to the way nature might now be conceived, as in not that idealised pre-industrial or even pre-agrarian picture that humanist values often depicted with, rather a multi-complex 

The point of connection is, first, the understanding of user as anything able to produce data and share it with other users through interfaces of some sorts. This presupposes that, after human beings have tried to mastered and bend the world for centuries, letting us all reaching now a level of the world highly structured, governed, and inhabited by machines of different kind, we human users should start to understand these complexities we (accidentally) have built.

> The geopolitics of the User we have now is inadequate, including its oppositional modes. The Oedipal discourse of privacy and transparency in relation to the Evil Eye of the uninvited stepfather is a necessary process toward an alterglobalism, but it has real limits worth spelling out. A geopolitics of computation predicated at its core upon the biopolitics of privacy, of self-immunization from any compulsory appearance in front of publics, of platforms, of states, of Others, can sometimes also serve a psychological internalization of a now-ascendant general economy of succession, castration anxiety—whatever. The result is the pre-paranoia of withdrawal into an atomic and anomic dream of self-mastery that elsewhere we call the “neoliberal subject.”


* * *

In order to proceed with the above question, there is one more element to bring into account: the new geographies we live in as users. Benjamin Bratton proposes The Stack, both as a schema and a structure to understand the overall population of different computational systems already in use and constituting the world we inhabit. The Stack refers to:
> a transformation in the technical infrastructure of global systems, whereby planetary-scale computation has so thoroughly and fundamentally transformed the logics of political geography in its own image that it has produced new geographies and new territories that can enforce themselves. Unlike modern political geography, which divided up horizontal maps, Stack geography also vertically layers spaces on top of one another. Instead of surveying all the various forms of planetary-scaled computation—cloud computing, smart cities, ubiquitous computing, massive addressing systems, next-generation interfaces, nonhuman users, and so on—as different genres or species of computing, each off on its own, this model locates them on layers of a consolidated metaplatform, an accidental megastructure. (...) The Stack is a model for thinking about the technical arrangement of planetary computation as a coherent totality, as well as a conceptual model for thinking the contradictory and complex spaces that have been produced in its image. It is both a schema that refers to a technical system, and a technical system that demands different kinds of interpretive schema from us. It is a work of partially accidental geodesign that demands from us further, better deliberative geodesign.
Benjamin H. Bratton, The Stack—On Software and Sovereignty, 2016, pp. 375.

A new set of ethics dealing first with the user position, then trying to move beyond it and embrace the posthuman environment of the user, will have to work in close relation with the geographies of something like The Stack. Computation has significantly become a process part of our reality and of the nature of the time we live in. To better operate in this new space and being able to explore the user position we can inhabit as humans, a *new literacy of computation* will be necessary.

In tracing lines between the post-fordist worker and the internet user, and the related working environments the two subjects inhabit and operate within (office-home-etc., often using internet to communicate with a team or with clients, and internet platform) I saw, very often, a lack in the understanding, knowledge and even experience of these new positions. With the intentions to foster processes that amplify the formation of such new sensibility, with a new literacy of computation I refer, for example, to the making of a new language through which being able to describe what happens when we interact with other users (for example, framing users as ‘operative’ and not as ‘living organisms’ as pointed out in Chapter #1), and also, another example, getting to know and mastering (while being mastered by as well) the tools we have at our disposal, both accidentally built or intentionally designed.  This is one of the founding values that described usership, a set of practices where using, reusing, misusing, repurposing, and so forth are possible because of the rising of digital technologies as the common ground where making, consuming, and using things. 

It is because of these reasons that `git` might be an experiment in the act of gaining experience of, while setting out what this new literacy of computation might look like. As a tool to track informations and build histories out of it, it could as well act in a reversal manner and let human users better understand what are the other applications and ethical meanings of tracking. As a response to the general public discussion about the collection of citizens’ metadata from companies and governmental institutions alike, using `git` to reflect about different architecture of data collection and distribution might become an helpful exercise, even only as a way to make less abstract, absurdly, often overarching processes difficult to grasp.

At the same time, through a new literacy of computation, I look for ways to embrace complexities that are not user-friendly, handicapping my human-user framing, understanding and mis-understanding of them, and longing for tasting data, for being able to relate to it in modalities that go beyond looking at my stats on a website platform’s dashboard, but for example realising that my own body is a mix of metadata of different kinds, starting from my own faeces:
> Grandparent toilet bowl stool diviners, you were right: considering the density of DNA from microbes, from one’s own internal fluids, and from the DNA of the remaining food stuffs that one ate, the human stool is one of the most information-dense substances you are likely to regularly encounter. Bit by bit, your stool is far more information rich per cubic centimeter than the flash memory in your iPhone.
Benjamin H. Bratton, The Stack—On Software and Sovereignty, 2016, pp. 269.

I think, overall, that a new literacy of computation, understood in this way, might also help to finally realise that we don’t have to take neither the positions of machines (as in, human beings are simply machines processing data and provided with functioning organs), nor ignoring that the nature we live in, is nowadays different than the one of a perfect balance between humans and the natural world that once existed—it never was. We live surrounded by machines of different kinds, with data that has become essential in the functioning of the world we inhabit, but not for this we have to become machines as much as possible. Posthuman, for how I intend it, doesn’t mean beyond human, or over the human. Posthuman means human beings at the side f the world, because there are many other entities inhabiting it. Rather than disparaging what makes us human beings, it’s maybe a matter of iterate ourselves over it and finding ways to relate with other users.