# ow—notes on post-fordism

*On the relationship between post-fordism and current internet-based usership [^1*]

[^1]: Though I might argue I could take “internet-based” off from this sentence, and still having quite a valid argument for it.

 * * *
 
* What is post-fordism and how can it be connected to current internet-based usership?

The user is the latest, iterated form of what, from the beginning of the 70s, has been called an new area and typology of worker: the post-fordist subject.

In its conception, it is a perfect example of the final implementation, after forty years, of the politics of neo-liberalism: for it is that a post-fordist worker has to be flexible, self-organised and self-sufficient.

More over, a post-fordist worker operates in the service sector, be it a graphic designer, or a caregiver.

There is a double side to this new condition: you can succeed and being able to shape yourself a good life, holding tight to your position and life-experience knowledge; or either you can easily perish and become miserable, because the economic situation crushes you under someone’s feet.

Highly flexibility means that hypothetically you can work six months in a row, then spent other 5-6 months head down on your businesses—whether it is travelling, making projects as an artist, or dedicate your life to some other personal interests.

At the same time, this can be used as well by companies and employers of any kind to keep you in a state of endless paralysis, for which if you leave for more than three days or a week you have lost your job, or “contact”.

The cognitariat is the most famous category part of it. More and more, the task of the worker has become intellectual, not necessarily because they have to “think intensely” for producing an output for their work, but rather because of the nature itself of many of the jobs within this container: call-centres, shop assistants, and then copy-writers, advertisers, students, (...)

What if often less understood as part of this is the big section of the affective and emotional labour—from teachers to care-givers, to mums and wives, and once again call-centres and so on.

Giving the very personal sphere of production from which this new typology of very broadly defined worker, drawing surplus value from the emotive and mental energies of, it is even more clear how the line between the subject of the post-fordist worker and the one of the user can be drawn.

Immaterial labour was once theorised and used, in the middle of the 90s, to give some acknowledgements to a new level of transformation of the post-fordist worker-becoming consumer and sucking data from its being in the world and operating in the different sphere (private and public already vanishing) of the informational society. Internet only recently became a public, civilian hence commercial thing.

I think that nowadays keep using the label immaterial labour makes no sense anymore, and for one reason: the new and hidden sphere of un-aware exploitation from das Kapital is now extensively defined and brought to the public attention of, the user.

The user, the internet user, after a transformation from understanding internet as a dark and scary sphere of the domain of life and afterword being lit by services such as facebook and myspace, it is now totally integrated as a new plane of life—which is nice, but also dumbly simplified to a 1:1 representation of how we are in life (won’t say “real life” because it’s a blind understanding of life) and especially of how we would like to be. A 1:1 projection, not too much far way from the real condition of our existence, but still distorted enough to become the perfect citizen. Or rather, the perfect user.

The adjective perfect, it is used not as a unilateral force that impresses a predefined outline from Society (either by the State, or the economy—indeed the ethics in current usage of a society), but also from a personal and visceral sets of desires of what we think, under the influence of the slice of society that we live in and care about (which can be two very different sites—think about a south European person all crazy for Japanese culture), we should aspire for. 

The perfect user, therefore, could be someone fitting, as in, using all the required social networks to produce enough valuable data for the companies governing such social areas, but also adding personal influences drew from specific sub or niche culture, or rather, linking his being funny when he’s afk (away from the keyboard) into his social feeds through the usage and production of memes.

The perfect user, for this reasons, is the person each of us would like to be—for different reasons and several points of pressures.

Another striking point of contact, or better, a perfect continuation and iteration from the post-fordist worker to the user, is the enormous amount of personal (emotional, mental and physical) energies spent by her into the activities she accomplishes. In contrast to this, the type of compensation that she receives back from the platform she uses and worked for, is often in monetary term non-existent or undervalued. Still, the possibility that she has to keep a certain vicinity with the other users she interacts with is unsurmountable.

The same could be maybe said for a caregiver worker, in the best-case scenario, or often times any other post-fordist worker given the best he could to a client or the person from whom he has been asked something. The wage earned, though, still remained precarious.