# embodying git—obfuscation, torrent aesthetic, decomposition

Before I forget for real, last week I had this thought in mind after a while: the suggestion that an “artist” gave me during a tutorial last spring, in regards to my research. Making a film where you can see (as if it was) in real time, the aggregation of the different bits of that file assembling and mixing together, in order to form the final, fully downloaded video file.

This means starting the film with an almost black screen and intermittent but noisy audio and then, slowly, as a direct reference to the genesis (really?) and or the creation of the world (really?), progressing towards the middle of the film with more and more details for eventually reaching the end of it where, probably, you will be able to see if not a scene, maybe a short snippet or a couple of stills fully formed.

This popped up in my mind again because during the tutorial with Julika last week, she proposed me to film the same scene (for each video) with different cameras: computer’s webcam (webcam, really?), iPhone, videocamera, camera, and so forth. This as a way to work on the quality of the picture and confront how different “eyes” perceive and records light.

I just finished to read a paper on obfuscation called “Vernacular resistance to data collection and analysis: A political theory of obfuscation”. I am not sure that’s a direction I want to take research-wise (or maybe not as the primary one), but still aesthetically I find it very interesting, because it reminds me of the exhibition which took place during the month of October at w139. It was called Ch’u, and it was about

> The steam bath (– i.e. fog, mist, haze, interference –) is one component of C'hu: an extension of a shared interest in algorithmic, mechanical and biological processes and the ongoing breakdown of the binary logic of the human and non-human at the heart of the cybernetic body. Did we talk already about the-dog-that-was-wolf?
> The show locates the uncertainty inherent to complex systems in the non-linear structure beyond individual perception and proposes the idea of state of distributed autonomy between server networks, architecture, the psychoactive potential of plants, choreography and fog; to help us "un-think what we don't know we are thinking".
> Self-intoxication as self-surrection, politics of heat maps, a proposal for mess and a "consent to not be a single being".

More over, the general feeling Julika had over my interest in git was mainly about tracking and self-tracking. Which is true but also, as I see it personally, a mere starting point to move towards many other different loci (loci? places?).Yet, the essential point of departure to talk about subjectivity and human-machine-human relationships.

As I was thinking this morning, self-tracking in git is not the same as all the other apps or the general trend about the quantified-self. Or is it? I am not sure self-tracking in git presupposes a better understanding of yourself through your logged actions. It can be extremely helpful as a way to have a more granular overview and control over the project you are working on, but not necessarily bringing as side-effect a better picture of how you work.

Because that’s one of the central question: to which level of self-reflection can a tool like git can be used? Is it just a 2.0 pre-punched card? It is not.

In re-reading what I wrote in `ow_draft--1`, I feel rejoice. There is a lot of stuff going which I just put aside because I thought I needed to go forward and find a completely new way for the project.

(*Messy thoughts*)

The main problem with me being unable to figure out a way to start to work on “embodying-git”, is that I need time to translate and find appropriate forms of physicality and sensorial stimulus for the videos.

Interestingly enough, or quite shamefully, I almost completely avoided to look into the bros culture and its aesthetics. Similarly, the same happened for internet-based companies space environments. And more importantly, I have zero interest for the mythical figure fo the hacker. 

At first, what I thought was quite inspiring was a film such as *Tetsuo—The Iron Man*. Though not clear, the main (?) characters looks like a middle class, white-collar dude finding a great interest in developing his own body into something else (than what it is now). Namely, overcoming the neat separation between human flesh and metal(-made) machine. Not completely transforming into a machine but retaining, indeed, some fundamental aspects of the human body or of what it is to be human.

Although I am not planning to work on this kind of transformation (yet?), I am quite drawn by the visual elements of the film because it’s very much rough in different ways: it is shot on black and white film; it has a violent and direct aesthetic regarding the portraying of the bodies and the overall “reality” of the film, it’s very punk—indeed one of the finest? example of Japanese cyberpunk (≠ from American cyberpunk); sexuality is heavily present and especially a particular description of the body (people sweating a lot, people’s way of breathing, people’s facial expression), which is between a manga style and a Brechtian kind-of theatre?

And then it’s crazy and (positively?) nihilistic in its intent to set on fire the world and turn it all into a big junkyard of rusty pieces of metal. “Let’s finish off humanity once and for all!”.

Last week I came across a copy of *The Gentlewoman*, and browsing through it I found a short article on how to stretch and stay fit at the office where you work.

The female model, or actress?, was doing (making?) some exercises using the office-printer as a piece of architecture through which extend her arms and back (pushing towards the printer while grabbing it to counter-balance her horizontal extension). In another picture, she is giving her back to the desk and stretching the upper part of her body using the table as an handhold (mostly arching her back out). In another shot she’s facing the desk and inclining her body to 45° using her arms to accomplish it.

These pictures are very telling of different aspects of the “modern” life in the office—should it still be labeled as modern? Or, rather post-fordist?

It’s funny how these kind of pictures are completely “modern” to my eyes, if we put aside the updated clothes and office environment (large-leaf plants, beige printer, white desks, iMacs, etc). That’s indeed the kind of ideal Apple and the “hip” office culture aim at. Very much nostalgic of the 60s.

I am not interested in that type of aesthetic, though in regard to the kind of office environment I am still planning to shoot the videos at the studio, using my white desk and blue curvy chair as the two main elements of the scene (or at least that’s what happened with the first attempt a couple of weeks ago).

If there’s ever gonna be an office environment, white tables and plants will be part of it. There’s also wheeled-printer, which I really like and would fit perfectly.

Now, coming to the actual content of the videos, what do I want to do? What should happen in there?

I have some motivations for why using this format and for why I want to explore certain ideas through a visual embodiment of them (fuck the word embodiment man!). Quoting from `ow—note 23-11-2015`:

>> He says of the project’s inception, that he was intrigued by an oddly “naive idea of nature that seemed strikingly prevalent in my social environment.. I was curious to know how these simulations of Nature work in digital media, how do we do experience these simulated materials”.
> [J.G. Biberkopf](http://www.k-n-i-v-e-s.com) about its album “Ecologies”

> Similarly, my interest with this video (probably “these videos”) lies in the explorative dimension of how much git influences a certain way of working, thinking, acting, moving, and so forth. Hence, which kind of imaginaries does it provoke in one’s mind? Which kind of associations when thinking about `git-init` or `git-commit` or `git-push`?

Still, my initial idea was to explore the possibilities of five-six selected basic commands you can do on in with git. So, beginning from the word itself, always a verb, moving on and, probably using a grid of some sorts (e.g. the five points present in `ow_draft--1` and used as chapters of the text-manifesto) exploring this verb in regard to git and to (digital) post-fordist labour happening in on and for the internet.

Probably one big thing I still have to think about is: what kind of person I am interested in? And moreover, how much is that important?

As of now, I see two possibilities for that:
1. yes, it is of utter importance because of the overall way the videos are built (a body accomplishing specific actions)
2. no, it’s not so much relevant because this actions are filmed in  a way the subject itself, the body, it’s as much useful as to give shape to these actions

Which means choosing the subject is very much important.

To go back to certain trajectories I was doing with my mind, specifically regarding a big anxiety towards laying down some foundations for the research project, the question of which kind of body and subjects was persistently present. Almost a fever.

I somehow feel a strong connection between feminist politics and  the kind of specific research I am bringing on, internet and labour. As in: most kind of labour happening on and for the internet nowadays can be compared and is connected to all the so labelled care and affective labour which took visibility during the 70s in europe (refuse to write europe with a capital e), usa and japan (to name a few place I can be sure of—I’m still afraid of the consequences of generalisation).