# on how to put on display ‘drawing-cursor’ at the graduation show, part two

Composite user is what is going to be, either in the case each user draws her his own thing, there is a timer kicking in who print the current drawing and refresh the canvas (considering if doing this last action or not), but especially in the case you look at this action as a process where the human user is add input data, which is then transformed into something else and maybe printed, maybe not, maybe outputted in a different way, by automatised machinic user.

I also thought that I could make clear what’s happening in the background, by display as webpage where users are going to act with the cursor, a page briefly and concisely explaining drawing-cursor project. Saying “drawing-cursor is a google chrome extension that reads and transforms cursors movements and interactions in shapes of different kinds, hence producing a drawing. Each artefact is the unwilled decision of a user browsing the internet, and activating the extension before starting his her internet routine. The byproduct of the extension, is a drawing of which the user has a form of blind agency: aware that it will be composed by his her actions, but impossible to check while in the making. Where is the threshold between useful surplus extraction value and useless data extraction? And for whom? In both sides the output, though maybe enjoyable, is unwanted at most. While still ideally monetasible, these drawings are the expression of unconscious decisions, user tics and behaviours, website design practices, etc.”

Ok this text I just jotted down is maybe a bit too long. Maybe “drawing-cursor is a google chrome extension that reads and transforms cursors movements and interactions in shapes of different kinds, hence producing a drawing. Each artefact is a drawing of which the user has a form of blind agency: aware that it will be composed by his her actions, but impossible to check while in the making. Where is the threshold between useful surplus extraction value and useless data extraction? And for whom?”

In this way the user interacting with the website will read what’s going on while taking part in it, and realising she took place in a background process: once she knows whats’s happening, she either can start to make the most out of it (drawing) or shying away? No other options? Maybe asking?

It will also depend on how the output of her interaction will take shape and will be materialised.

What is the reason behind drawing-cursor?

To test what user agency means, in an environment where more and more kind of users (machinic, mineral, bot, animal, etc.) are populating the world we inhabit. To show how many interactions happening on the internet are not solely executed due to our decisions and wishes, but out of a more complex set of relationships.

There is also a hint toward the dialectic user—platform. Is there a line after which surplus value extraction becomes useless? If on one side a user will have to set he extension on start, to begin using it—but in so doing he will not have any clue of what’s happening out of his interactions, because the drawing taking shape is invisible to him, so the connection between user’s agency and self-expression and the output produced inhabit two different temporal moment and there no way to check how it is going while producing it; on the other side also for a platform hosting or employing this kind of extension, the surplus value extracted is of no real value. First is a drawing, and beside selling it on a market place, what’s the quality and value of this drawings? Second, while they still might want to use the drawings to check what are the most clicked places on a website, the extension uses the window browser, so the canvas of the drawing is the size of the window browser: when a user scrolls down the drawing doesn’t get any longer to add more height to the canvas and so tracing a lower area of the website, but instead changes the background colour of the drawing. Third, this drawings, while being viewable by a user after he decided to stop the extension, are not sent to any other website whatsoever. Sure, it’s totally doable, but the reason behind this is also to show a level of gesturality between a human-user interaction and his her browsing activities on the internet. The drawing is an ephemeral output that one might want to collect for one’s own sake, even maybe opening an ad-hoc tumblr to put them all on display and, sell prints of them? In this case, the relation between user’s value production and the outputted value is re-appropriated by the producer of it. But what I am interested in showing is exactly this: ownership of one’s interaction on the internet are often a sum of one’s action mixed with many other agents operating with us. So, for example the fact of showing, if only for a brief period of time, the artefact a human-user has produced, through the action of printing it and hanging it on a wall for an hour, breaks away with the feeling of ephemerality and temporariness, while reinforces the impossibility—on the user’s side—to own what he she did. While I like the last part of this, I also want to emphasise the first part of it.

1. letting them read and slowly realise something is going on while they are taking part in it
2. keeping them away from any feeling of ownership
3. keep a transient feeling for the produced artefact as well

As gen suggested, they might insert their email address in order to received the png of the drawing. But then they will have the png. The question is: do I want to only show them briefly, what they have helped in doing, or to give it to them?

* if you’re reading this it’s too late
* user agency → composite user;
* retaining and refraining a sense of (joyful) uselessness