# ow—thesis chapter #0 (version 2, draft)

What does it mean to work when work is no longer a necessary human activity to make a living? What other forms and meanings could this activity take?

At the same time of a resurgence, in the last period, of an interest in post-work societies, driven by Universal Basic Income and full-automatisation of labour, there is, in parallel, a more systematic proliferation of tracking processes happening on the internet, out of which web platforms and companies extract surplus value from users’ activities for their on benefits.

While the two phenomena might not have any relation with each other, a question I’d like to pose is: if thanks to a Universal Basic Income, ideally I won’t have to worry about covering the basic needs to set up not a decent, but a good-enough life, how would this affect the situation on the internet? Would a post-work society be mirrored also in this space?

The transition I am interested in exploring, is the passage from the post-fordist worker to the internet user, which happened in the last decade: while the former label has been used to describe a set of jobs ranging from care workers to designers and journalists to call center employees (the general constitution of, for the most part, precarious, part-time, project-based jobs)—where, depending on the tasks, either mental or affective labour are determining in the type of work performed; with the latter subject, the internet user, I identify the new iteration of worker part of the capitalist society we live in: a subject ontologically defined, already in its formation, by a mix of affective and mental labour.

Which forms do labour take on the internet, from a user perspective? Though not the only one, the most pervasive is the technique adopted by platforms we use everyday (facebook, gmail, instagram, whatsapp, twitter and so forth), through which they invisibly suck informations we produce and share up, in order to sell them to advertisers and spit them back to us in the form of customised ads. [^1]

[^1]: A project dealing with algorithmic ads suggestions based on the content users produce is [American Psycho](http://jason-huff.com/projects/american-psycho/), by Mimi Cabell and Jason Huff: «This book was made by sending the entire text of Bret Easton Ellis' American Psycho between two gmail accounts page by page. We saved the relational ads for each page and added them back into the text as footnotes».

In dealing with the multiform action of tracking, what I want to explore is a platform called GitHub and the tool upon which it is built, `git`: tracking, in this case, doesn’t happen as a non-aware and malicious background process, but rather as a deliberate and voluntary activity part of the application workflow.

GitHub (github.com) is a website and a platform where users can share, contribute and download code-based projects: a ‘social network’ for people who use `git` in their workflow. `git` is a version control system for text-based files, which is, a software that, once installed, tracks every change a user makes on one or a set of files, within one or more folders she he it decided to look after. This is useful to keep track of the work done so far, especially when it is fragmented in a team, but also for going back and forth within the project history, when something went wrong or a user needs a specific file now deleted.

Whereas other internet-based platforms, like Über and Amazon M Turk, are explicit in their intents to be a job-offer for someone looking for work, github.com keeps itself in the grey area of being for both personal and professional use.

As much as a programmer working at a company can use it for his her job, a weekend website-maker can use it as well for the same purposes. Being `git` only an added element to one’s workflow, the reason for creating an account on github.com are highly subjectives, and totally in line with the spirit of the creative post-fordist worker (where famously ‘work is play and play is work’). As a user, the personal takes over the sphere of the professional, transforming both into one smooth space.

In the act of imagining an expansion in the usage of `git` and GitHub as a model to organise labour on the internet, I wonder how the possible effects of the above cited post-work, Universal Basic Income-based society would effect this sphere of existence. By post-work society, I refer to a cultural shift in the understanding of labor, where human beings are freed of the need to provide themselves with basic material needs, hence with the action of sustaining themselves. Post, the, refer to moving away from the action of work as defining activity of one’s life (both in the form of making one’s life materially possible, as well as fulfilling one’s needs of meaning and direction in life). While in books such as ‘Inventing the Future’ (Nick Srnicek and Alex Williams, 2015), there seems to be a total automatisation of labour, and in particular of what they refer to as ‘shit job’ [^2], what they actually mean is a diminution of tasks human beings have to perform within a job, rather than the full automation of it altogether. In short, they reinforce the thesis of a more tight collaboration between human beings and machines, while in the process of moving toward a post-capitalist society [^3].

[^2]: From [urbandictionary.com](http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=Shit%20job): «An unfulfilling, tedious waste of 8+ hours of the day, five days of the week, that you only persist with in order to pay the bills and the ever mounting debt that comes from having to increase your spending in order to entertain yourself outside of working hours as you are so brain dead from the hours you spend in work.»

[^3]: Still, the advancement of machine automatisation also brought what is referred to as ‘shadow work’: self-check out devices at the supermarket, self-service petrol station, self check-in at the airport—all tasks that on one side give the sense of a more agile service, but, on the other, with the effect of cutting on personnel and assign a considerate amount of labour on the customer.

What would the words work and labour might mean, in such a society? In the most progressive scenario, work might be performed more and labour less—if with labour we refer to any activity performed within a job, and with work, instead, to a general activity demanding a certain amount of energy, attention, and interest no matter the context.

The reframing of the importance toward the activity of work as a life-meaning vector, also includes the questioning of the driving force through which «each thing, as far as it can by its own power, strives to persevere in its being». This is the concept of conatus expressed by Benedictus de Spinoza in his book Ethics, here understood as both a force present in each thing constituting the world, which permits them to survive and let them being what they are. But also, since their strive to persevere in their being, conatus as a drive to foster a process of self-iteration, of always-becoming, over time. Can the spinozian conatus take a different meaning for the internet user?

The separation between performing work to sustain one’s life, and working for a different set of reasons and values, becomes central in analysing the iteration from post-fordist worker to internet user. This separation of intentions, indeed, is already present on the internet nowadays: most of users’ interaction and value-production are made for free, be it because is part of invisible value-extraction mechanisms (e.g. social networks); or as a genuine interest in contributing to a common good (for example Wikipedia). With the advent of an hypothetic post-work society, this shift might get stronger.

Another element helpful in defining the environment of the project I am working on, is the concept of the posthuman turn. As a set of theories describing the decentering of the human being as measure of all things in the world, the definition of (internet) user given by Benjamin Bratton (The Stack—On Software and Sovereignty, 2016) is of significant importance: a user is anything able to produce data and exchange it, through the help of interfaces, with other users. This definition appears fundamental when talking about labour on the internet between users: the human user is only one of the possible entities this position can be inhabited by, opening it up to users with animal, plant, machinic, mineral, algorithmic (and so forth) natures.

Data assumes the role of raw material through which performing communication acts between users of different natures: finding an interface to get in contact with each other becomes essential. Tracking, framed as a process of keeping tab of what happened and what is happening, can be used to build new kinds of these interfaces. The action of tracking, as an activity, traverses both the sphere of ethics and labour, when it is dissected through `git` and github.com.