Why there is still a interest toward work (possibly?) in a post-work society? 

Post-work moves the accents on work which is not merely reproductive labour, done in order to keep living; but rather on activities which now often are hobbies, personal projects done in the evening or during the weekend, etc.

The centrality of work, or of labour, will probably remain, as a need of reach one’s fulfilment.

⤷ Willing Slaves of Capital

* * *

> Always amused when people can't see any moral differences between a toaster, a self-driving car, and sentient AI

> On the one hand, people who think it's nonsense to talk about rights for AI. On the other hand, people who think you can enslave toasters

@n_srnck

So it seems the point he was making is one for which there are sentient machines and not sentient ones. Which is fine, and requires more problematisation (?).

But it converges to my thoughts regarding why it makes sense to me, to talk about posthumanism and posthuman ethics in my thesis in relation to the user subject and a post-work society with a basic income: not only because robots will might take more and more human work, but also because the relationships involved in being a user touch many different agents in the equation—which calls for different kind of ethics between human and non-human ahuman agents.

And the first question is: do we enslave robots? Are they going to be the new slaves of capital?

Just want to write about this now, and walking around since some time and need proper space to flesh it out (flesh as mammal?). 


> Neoliberalism can be initially understood as an assault on these securities, as union contracts and other forms of security are replaced by the demands for flexibility. This institutional change is coupled with a fundamental transformation at the level of the affects. If the subject of Fordism was the consumer, identifying his or herself with the pleasures of the market, the subject of neoliberalism is a particular kind of worker, an entrepreneur of him or herself. The elevation of terms like “entrepreneur” and “networking” to generic values, shared by all without any specification of their ends or goals, reflects a society in which the generic capacity and willingness to engage in work is seen as the source of joy. This might seem as a reversal of Fordism, a turn away from the joys of consumption and towards joy sought in the activity of work, but it is important to stress that the joy sought is not that of this or that job or activity, the rewards of a craftsman, or other satisfaction, but the joy of simply being engaged. One identifies not with concrete labor, not with the pleasures and demands of this specific task, or the craftwork ideal of a job well done but with abstract labor — with the general capacity of being put to work. It is not enough to simply show up to work or to find one’s pleasures in what the wage makes possible: contemporary workers must demonstrate a love for work. Emotional labor is no longer demanded of just the flight attendant or bartender but becomes ubiquitous, as everyone must demonstrate affective commitment to the job. As Lordon writes, “Neoliberal capital is the world of the girlfriend experience,” alluding to the figure of the sex worker who simulates love in order to describe the affective demands of the contemporary, motivated employee.