# salvaschermo ws, part III

Within the project `ow`, *salvaschermo* takes the place of a first inquiry in the ethics of a post-human (internet) user.

I am interested in exploring the concept of user in the way it is described by Benjamin Bratton in the Stack: an accidental megastructure composed by user—interface—address—city—cloud—earth.

A user is any subject able to interface with another user. A user can be of various nature: living being (animal, plant), mineral, machine, etc. A user can be formed by two or more subjects, e.g. a human interacting with a machine; a stone interacting with a plant.

Salvaschermo was born out of a personal interest in 1. making a workshop; 2. working with and on the internet, in particular bringing two “different” worlds and related set of behaviours (the internet and the real life) together; 3. expanding my notion of graphic design and its possibilities to make use of other approaches and techniques toward a project.

The first iteration of the workshop failed, for logistics and practical reasons (planned to do the workshop in my hometown in Italy but living in Amsterdam, lost interest by the teenagers I presente the workshop to, etc.).

The second iteration of the workshop moved toward my formed art high-school, with a very positive response in the beginning, but then austerity (?)—not enough money for extra projects outside the regular school program—made it failed. It would have been also very problematic in terms of logistics, but it could also have worked.

Now that it’s getting, and I’m getting ?, more and more clear about which topics I want to focus on, I see a good chance in taking this workshop back, reshaping it, and using it as one of the small projects forming my thesis.

Beginning with the logistics: since I would like to use the workshop format, I want to try to contact [De Punt](http://depunt.org) in Amsterdam, to ask if they would be up to host the project. Their range of activities is quite close to the same themes I am addressing, so that would not be a problem.

* * *