# Embodying git—git-init, first sketch of a video

Put together myself (can’t find a reason either to wake up in the morning nor to go to sleep at night since a month or so) and pushed myself over to shoot a firs sketch for the video I am envisioning in my head during the last weeks.

iPhone kept together with a rubber band to a glass, in order to form a tripod. Both on top of the highest podium that we have at the studio. Started recording and set the light. Slowly clean out my white table form the notebooks and the papers, the books, the laptop, the cups. Took off the iPhone’s view the blue chair and the backpack. Disconnected the charger from the outlet. Took the grey brick next to the wall and the heater off view.

Switched off the lamp and put it away.

Then waited for a while, maybe one or two minutes. Put tape around the podium to mark its position. Check the photography of the scene.

Blue chairs put in front of the table. Put back the computer. Another pause between the setting up of each element on the table. Brought books. And notebooks. And keys.

Put back the lamp and turned it on.

Had so much difficulty to watched the almost 20 minutes of video and mark where things happen, actions took place and changes are made visible.

Cut up five or six moments out of the first part where the camera is just looking at an empty table devoid of anything. Played with colour-variation: from very red to very blue; in between tones. When at the end of the sequence I switched on the lamp colours got less weird and moved back from a very blue tone to an almost *normal* one—but not completely.

Since I am just doing stuff without any clear cognition of why so, just after this one hour video editing session I realised how much, in terms of preparation (git-init) to a working environment, this colour variation really helps to draw attention to a passage between before and after. Before I had this passage more clear in my mind, I wanted to write something about it—no I forgot and maybe it will comeback.

* * *

> He says of the project’s inception, that he was intrigued by an oddly “naive idea of nature that seemed strikingly prevalent in my social environment.. I was curious to know how these simulations of Nature work in digital media, how do we do experience these simulated materials”.
[J.G. Biberkopf](http://www.k-n-i-v-e-s.com) about his album “Ecologies”

Similarly, my interest with this video (probably “these videos”) lies in the explorative dimension of how much git influences a certain way of working, thinking, acting, moving, and so forth. Hence, which kind of imaginaries does it provoke in one’s mind? Which kind of associations when thinking about `git-init` or `git-commit` or `git-push`?

I am also very hardly trying to avoid the metaphor of the genesis with this first video about `git-init`. So much. Every reference to something *just born* are nauseous.