# Towards a foundation

11/11/2015

*This text file serves as a basis and especially a starting point for the project research `ow`*.

The first building block is a short snippet, taken from a video of Carmelo Bene (c.b. as Deleuze used to write) regarding the difference, in his perspective, between a dictatorship and a democratic state: what does one give to someone than the other does not, or can't? Why should democracy be a better political framework than a dictatorial government?

In c.b.'s view, democracy—if it would exist at all—would set us to the same starting point for which life is unlivable: it doesn't resolve our existence altogether from the beginning. It doesn't give us answers. In this, democracy is the best option because it sets everybody to the same desert-like life environment.

Yet, in c.b.'s perspective, democracy doesn't really exist, and what we have is a pure form of demagogy.

⤷ [link to video snippet].

Here a transcript of the above video extract:
> What's the only form of government which guarantees something? Democracy, no doubts. Paradoxically it's the most acceptable. Emil Cioran made a good analysis about it.
> So I ask you: what does democracy guarantee that a dictatorship does not? Sure! It guarantees something—do you know what is it? It guarantees life to be unlivable. It doesn't figure out your life! Who chooses democracy, who chooses freedom, chooses the desert—if democracy were freedom at all. But democracy is nothing, democracy is pure demagogy.
*Carmelo Bene at Maurizio Costanzo Show, Canale 5—Italy, 1994*.

I take this position and understanding of democracy as one of the essential elements for the project research. Besides my very vivid interest towards Carmelo Bene, what I find compelling is the idea of democracy as a desert: do we really want to take part in what's going on? Okay, let's just give up, then, on every kind of possible god and just make use of ourselves. How far can we go with the embracement of freedom? How much do we want to be involved in everyday political and social decision of the community where we're living in? Deciding to take freedom as one of our core value, while being part of a community means we can't rely on someone else: if we do not make our part, things collapse. First of all because we can't even figure out a way to sustain ourselves. 

Comparing democracy to a desert equals to perform a big tabula rasa: what's our values, how do we stay together, how much do we want to rely on somebody else and what for.

Demos. Chaos. Not as an impossible to play with disorder, rather, as a never-ending movement full of changes, a not defined vector. Better, a vector and not a segment with point A and point B.

What is a desert then? Freedom in c.b.'s words. As in, you have to deal yourself about your life. Take off your hands from any possible handhold, any God of some forms. The State? Certainly. Also the State. But, curiously, c.b. says that "it's possible to have a government without a State" (from the same talk show, Maurizio Costanzo '94).

[expand a bit the concept of desert]

Since my interest revolves around internet and labour, with a particular focus in the subjectivity and subjectivisation of the worker (becoming user), this very existentialist take on democracy seems quite appropriate to me. Starting from this core, I can build around other areas of interest, research and experimentation, as I tentatively wrote in the first draft of the project—[github.com/afincato/ow_draft--1](https://github.com/afincato/ow_draft--1).

* * *

Federico Campagna's book "The Last Night", deals with the rising of the conception of job as personal identification and dissect the reasons for it to happen.

He compares work to God (≠god), and makes the point that in absence of some metaphysical entities to revere and curse, now work has taken that place (now as in the last twenty or more years? As in after WWII?). Work has become a new metaphysical entity in itself, a signifier for one's existence and appearance in the world. How do you take form? Through your job, which is not a *job* anymore, it is a life-long occupation, even when this occupation changes overtime and or takes other and different forms. Occupation because we adhere to it as our main occupation in life, it takes us completely, we're sucked from it.

> At last, they could swap the ill-fated demand for freedom of religion with the emancipatory cry for freedom from any religion. At last, they could build for themselves communities that did not irradiate from any central totem.
(*this also refers to the above use of the word desert when compared to democracy*)

> In fact, what they really needed wasn’t a prayer, but a mantra: an invocation that revolves on itself, a spell that endlessly produces itself, a belief in believing.

> There was only one possible, almost perfect candidate. The activity of repetition par excellence: Work.

Work is then a re-creating entity, a never-ending activity which always asks for more and which we can't let go, or give up. The price is being aimless, without no God and no idea of what to do in this world. Freedom sucks a lot when this happens, because we can't even think of spending some time without doing anything in particular. Horror vacui in face of time which is always running (out?) and value (could be money, could be time, could be physical energy, etc).

> Every moment of the day that escapes the universe of Work is a wasted moment, a time of despair and loneliness.

*The Last Night* is full of great examples and reflections on how to get out of the normative state of things, Society, social relationships, and so forth, in order to enter a... desert? Or better, to look at things with a different attitudine and perceive them with less religion on top of them.

Adventure and egoism are the two elements recalled in the book, which should be able to make us live a different life: no respect (in the sense of obedience and being caught from the past—and neither from the future), a sense of exhaustion for things, without any sense of immortality (for us, for events, etc.), an attitudine for escape the current reality not to shy away from it, but for breaking into it from a different angle (angles?).

There is a word Franco "Bifo" Berardi told me when we had dinner together after the talk me and Alberto organised. He told the word "exhaustion". We should start to make use of it, to embrace it and to enact it. To get exhaust and just stop doing things for a while (at least that's what I got from it). This can be reconnected to the word squandering:
> If religious discourses originate from the immortal sphere of normative abstractions, the antidote that we are seeking must exist outside of this sphere.
> Despite appearances, potlatch still remains a highly religious gesture.
> Squanderers dissipate their own wealth, but they do so only in their own interest and for their own enjoyment.
> example I’m thinking of is the tragic parable of Sicilian aristocracy.
> So committed were they to their squandering, that they managed to self-destruct as a class decades before the official abolition of the Italian aristocratic orders in 1945.
> they made it impossible for themselves to ever rely on the safety net of the system of the promise of their social class. They didn’t only lose their wealth, but their status and their honour.

To get exhausted. To not have a functioning body and a functioning mind anymore. To not have a functional body and a functional mind anymore. Let's say thirty minutes. Or let's say two days, a whole week. Not because you're sick in bed, rather because you can't take it anymore and you need to get rest. You want to take a break, a month-long pause.

[expand on the notion of exhaustion]

I'll go back to the text asap.

* * *

I think it is the Xenofeminism manifesto where I found some passages which goes hand in hand with the idea of tabula rasa and choosing democracy because it is a desert (what freedom is).

In particular, they make a good point on defining what absolute and universal mean for them, as in:
> Whilst capitalism is understood as a complex and ever-expanding totality, many would-be emancipatory anti-capitalist projects remain profoundly fearful of transitioning to the universal, resisting big-picture speculative politics by condemning them as necessarily oppressive vectors. Such a false guarantee treats universals as absolute, generating a debilitating disjuncture between the thing we seek to depose and the strategies we advance to depose it.
*Xenofeminism: A Politics for Alienation—Laboria Cuboniks, pp. 6.*

This understanding of the world's complexities and of the many possible realities inhabiting it as the universal, instead of the absolute (a finite end-point which equals to death) is better explained through and equivalent understanding with:
> The universal must be grasped as generic, which is to say, intersectional.
> (...) [intersectionality] a political orientation that slices through every particular, refusing the crass pigeon-holing of bodies.
> This non-absolute, generic universality must guard against the facile tendency of conflation with bloated, unmarked particulars—namely Eurocentric universalism—whereby the male is mistaken for the sexless, the white for the raceless, the cis for the real, and so on.
*Xenofeminism: A Politics for Alienation—Laboria Cuboniks, pp. 6.*

I'm very much interested in this manifesto, but in general in what feminism can bring inside the discourse I am articulating, to define what democracy can be for this project, because I think these two positions are going to form the basis upon which defining the subjectivity of a worker living in a democratic environment of some kind.

What is democracy? What should it be? What, for example, the Xenofeminist manifesto tells: a reality were universalism means taking into account each and every sign, without blurring some or all of them in order to give room to everybody—on the contrary, make them all reflects (as in reflecting under a ray of light) and so give them the chance to show their marks, their differences, their features, their incompatibilities. Fuck multiculturalism and integration, which means assimilation.

Choose the desert and get lost, get lost abruptly and harshly.

* * *

The passage from worker to user and from labour, or work, to usership.

A thought I had during the last days, right after the end, the past weekend, of the month-long symposium organised by w139 and called Idiotic Code: On Usership Resistance.

Could we start to call nowadays workers who makes use of the internet to accomplish their work, users? And could we include in this space also people who just make use of the internet, hence becoming internet users and accomplishing other kinds of labour? For many of the things people do on the internet, or use the internet for, the distinction between simply using a service and involuntarily working for such service has ceased to exist. We can clearly say that they are working.